---
layout: post
title:  "Lessons Learned on the Minimax Kata"
date:   2018-04-19 20:09:00 -0500
categories: kata minimax
---

There were a few things I really misunderstood about doing Code Katas, before I started doing them on a regular basis.  After several attempts over the past few weeks to write  the [Minimax][minimax] algorithm as a kata, I think I'm getting some better insight into how to approach this kata and others, in general.


[minimax]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimax#Pseudocode


## Bad Idea #1: The Instant Productivity Fallacy

Code Katas are supposed to be done in a matter of minutes, right?  I'm talking somewhere in the neighborhood of 10–60 minutes.  So anyone who calls him or herself a professional should be able to do this:

- within the first couple of tries
- on any kata, covering any algorithm or domain

*...right?*

Perhaps if I had stated my thinking in such an absurd manner up-front, it would have been more clear to me that *each new kata takes time to practice*.  Roy Osherove provides some helpful reinforcement of this point in his version of the [String Calculator Kata][string-calculator], where he provides an early stopping point for first-timers.

[string-calculator]: http://osherove.com/tdd-kata-1/

For several attempts, I would keep getting stuck right about here:

{% highlight go %}
func Minimax(player Player, game Game) (result Move, err error) {
	if game.IsOver() {
		return nil, errors.New("minimax: game over")
	}

	for _, space := range game.OpenSpaces() {
		gameWouldBe := game.ClaimSpace(player, space)
		if gameWouldBe.FindWinner() == player {
			return space, nil
		}
	}

	return nil, nil
}

type Game interface {
	ClaimSpace(Player, Space) Game
	FindWinner() Player
	IsOver() bool
	OpenSpaces() []Space
}

type Move interface {}
type Player interface {}
type Space interface{}
{% endhighlight %}

If you compare that to the pseudocode of the algorithm, you'll notice there's no scoring of draw games, no recursion, and no swapping of player perspectives.  In other words — even after a couple of hours — **this code still has a long way to go**.


### Lesson: Patience and Perseverance

With each new practice session, I could write more of the algorithm in less time.  The fact that I did ultimately meet my goal of being able to complete the kata in a few minutes helps me to realize that my early expectations were not very realistic.

There were a few actions that were helpful in breaking through the barriers:

* **Ask questions and pair**: Others provide key insights and offer encouragement to keep going.
* **Repeat often**: It can take a few attempts to see a recurring theme of what's getting in the way.
* **Hold a mini-retro**: Reflect afterwards on what worked better and what got in the way.
* **Take incremental steps**: Don't try to address everything during the next attempt.  Just pick one area that caused friction last time, and see if there's a different way to try it this time.

In the case of Minimax, there were some ideas that helped:

* Starting at the bottom of the recursion by evaluating games that are already over made for much smaller, initial tests.  Otherwise it was taking quite a while just to get the first, meaningful test to complete.
* Creating specific types for each parameter helped me leverage the compiler to avoid mixing up strings that I was using to represent available spaces on the board with player names.  Earlier efforts to save time by not introducing these types backfired when I started passing arguments in the wrong order.
* Implementing a smaller but equivalent variation like [Negamax][negamax] does result in a smaller algorithm that should be quicker to test-drive, if you can manage to avoid getting confused over all the negative signs.  Sometimes I drive straight towards Negamax; other times I find it easier to introduce it during the cycle that considers the opponent's point of view.  Sometimes it's just a refactoring of a working Minimax algorithm.

[negamax]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negamax


## Bad Idea #2: It Has to Be Realistic

Writing Minimax happens in a context (a game) for a purpose (to pick a move that maximizes the chances for victory) led me to some top-down thinking that inadvertently increased the scope of the kata.  Top-down thinking like this has served me well for making sure working features get added to an existing system, but it wasn't helping me during the kata.

Think about the context above — it implies a game with a set of rules and some notion of what the available choices are for each player, at any given time.  The purpose further suggests that you have to know what each player is deciding in order for the algorithm to be useful.

But take a step back and look at the pseudocode for Minimax.

{% highlight pseudocode %}
function minimax(node, depth, maximizingPlayer)
  if depth = 0 or node is a terminal node
    return the heuristic value of node

  if maximizingPlayer
    bestValue := −∞
    for each child of node
      v := minimax(child, depth − 1, FALSE)
      bestValue := max(bestValue, v)
    return bestValue

  else (* minimizing player *)
    bestValue := +∞
    for each child of node
      v := minimax(child, depth − 1, TRUE)
      bestValue := min(bestValue, v)
    return bestValue
{% endhighlight %}

It doesn't say anything about games, boards, rules, or decisions.  It's all about **scoring**.  If you want a final decision, all you have to do is write another function that calls `Minimax` on each of the possible moves (just the ones that are immediately available to you) and picks the move with the highest or lowest score. 


### Lesson: Divide and Conquer

The lesson for me is to divide and conquer.  There is so much from those early attempts that I didn't need.

First off, having games with rules was an early pain point.  I got to the point where I had dozens of lines of code for all sorts of fake games, which was much larger than the Minimax code I was trying to drive.  *Out with the games!*

Having boards with moves to available spaces was also a big slow-down.  I was spending a lot of time drawing game boards and rule sets before realizing that the only thing that mattered to Minimax is what game states are reachable and who — if anybody — wins those games?  *Out with boards, spaces, and physics!*

Finally, demanding a decision for the best move to pick (based upon the score) was not helping.  My attempt to do them both in the same function by returning a `(move, score)` tuple led me to something that didn't look much like the pseudocode anymore:

* The top-level function call returned a score and the best move.  But who cares about some abstract score when what you want is the move to make?
* Intermediate calls in the recursion associated a bounded score with a meaningless, intermediate move and gave that move back to you.  Most levels in the call stack just threw that move away.
* At the bottom of the recursion for game-over states, it could only score the game.  It didn't know what move had been made by the caller, so it left that part of the data structure blank.  

*Out with decisions!*


### Pondering the Single Responsibility Principle

My tendency towards top-down design causes me to think in terms of the Single Responsibility Principle a lot.  **Are picking a move and scoring the possible moves separate responsibilities that belong in distinct areas of a maintainable codebase?**

I started with the assumption that picking a move is already a small enough responsibility that it didn't need to be divided again, but now I'm not so sure.

* For starters, splitting up the scoring and the selection of top-level moves makes it a heck of a lot easier to test-drive the scoring and evaluation logic (i.e., the part of a player's decision making logic that is Minimax).
* The Single Responsibility Principle gives you guidance on when to split up code that has too many responsibilities, but it doesn't say you can't split it up further if you find that useful.  Besides, it says a ***class*** should only have one reason to change; it doesn't say anything about a class having only one function.  
* Even if I split up the scoring (Minimax) from the logic that picks a move into separate functions, they still have the same reason to change.  Both functions would have to be changed in order to use a new scoring or decision-making algorithm, but you wouldn't change one without changing the other.

Maybe I've been thinking about this principle a little too strictly.


## Maximize Profit

It took a lot of perseverance, but I finally wound up with a code kata that produced code that looks similar to the pseudocode.  What once seemed impossible is now within reach.

Patience and perseverance have paid off!
